y. 


SEURET 
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM 
RELEASE IN FULL 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


POSSIBLE PROGRAM OF FUTURE 
SOVIET MOVES IN GERMANY 


ORE 29-48 
Published en 


"28 April 1948 


COPY NO.79 
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
FOR REPORTS AND ESTIMATES 


— 


B200LF 


DISSEMINATION NOTICE 


1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient 
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s 
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further 
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa- 
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following: 


a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for 
the Department of State 

. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army 

. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy 

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force 

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission 

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff 


g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other 
Department or Agency 


exe Ra 


i 


2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with 
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by 
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. 


This document contains info Dy on affecting the national 
defense of the United State within the meaning of the 
Espionage Act, 50 U.S.C., ¥ and 32, d\amended. Its trans- 


ORE 29-48 SEGRET 


POSSIBLE PROGRAM OF FUTURE SOVIET MOVES IN GERMANY 
SUMMARY 


1. The following discussion covers a program that might be resorted to by the 
USSR in Germany in an effort to cause the Western Powers to leave Berlin, to con- 
solidate the Soviet hold over Eastern Germany, and to extend Soviet influence into 
Western Germany. Until recently this review of possible Soviet intentions was con- 
sidered purely speculative and the program one that would be attempted only after 
the USSR had concluded that Soviet interference with the Allied efforts in Western 
Germany could not be effected by legal international means or through local Com- 
munist subversion. The timing of the individual Stages of the program would prob- 
ably be conditioned upon the timing and success of Western Power action. 


2. The recent Soviet walkout from the Allied Control Council and Soviet efforts 
to impede transportation to and from Berlin indicate that this program may already 
be under way, and, that while risk of war may be involved, the plan possibly can be 
effected without military violence. 


3. It is believed, therefore, that recent Western Power action may have caused the 
USSR to decide that: . 

a. hope no longer remains for interfering through quadripartite means with 
the production of Western Germany upon which the success of the European Recovery 
Program substantially depends; 

b. the Soviet Zone must be placed under permanent control of a well organized 
German group, loyal to the USSR, and Supported by police state measures; 

c. the Peoples’ Congress should be the instrument for the formation of such 
a provisional German Government; 

d. in order to prevent Allied interference with this process of political consoli- 
dation, the Allied Control Council should be abolished, or permanently boycotted, and 
the Western Powers forced out of Berlin; 

e. the new German “Government” should be acknowledged, at a propitious 
time, as the official administration for Eastern Germany, with propaganda pretensions 
to authority over all of Germany; 

f. the Soviet Army should remain as the “protector” of the new Reich pending 
creation of a new German Army, by agreement with this government; and 

g. in an effort to undermine the Western Power program Western Germany 
should be pressed, by all possible methods, to “rejoin” the Reich. 


Note: The information in this report is as of 2 April 1948. 
The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air Force 
have concurred in this report. 


snag 


POSSIBLE PROGRAM OF FUTURE SOVIET MOVES IN GERMANY 


1. With the conclusion of the London tripartite talks and the decision to consider 
Western Germany in the ERP planning, the Kremlin may have decided that little hope 
remains for the USSR to interfere with US/UK Zone production. 


Three events: the results of the Soviet-sponsored Peoples’ Congress, the abrupt 
departure of the Soviet delegation from the Allied Control Council (ACC) meeting of 
20 March, and the subsequent Soviet efforts to impede both freight and passenger 
traffic between Berlin and the West indicate that at least the first steps in the outline 
of possible Soviet action may no longer be entirely in the realm of speculation. 


2. CIA has believed and continues to believe that the USSR might encourage the 
Peoples’ Congress to organize a future “national” administration and establish a de 
facto Government for the Eastern Zone while propagandistically claiming to speak 
for all the country. The Peoples’ Congress partially confirmed this opinion when 
it convened on 17 March, advocated the early establishment of a Government to replace 
the ACC, and evidenced its pretensions to speak for the German people. 


3. CIA has believed and continues to believe also that in preparation for the new 
“government”, the USSR would attempt to discredit the ACC. While the abrupt 
termination of the Control Council meeting of 20 March has not yet been extended 
to a permanent Soviet withdrawal from the Council, Soviet officials have charged that 
the Western Powers, by unilateral action, have already made the work of the Council 
worthless. 


4. The presence of the Western Powers in Berlin adds to the difficulty of establishing 
a Soviet puppet government in Eastern Germany, because of the “opposition” that 
operates from the sanctuary of the Western Powers’ sections of the city. The USSR 
would consequently desire to effect a Western Power evacuation of Berlin as expediti- 
ously as possible. The Soviet attempt to impede transport threatens to render un- 
tenable the position of a sizeable Allied group isolated over a hundred miles from the 
Western area, and, additionally, to cut off the industrial contribution of the US and 
UK sectors of Berlin from the Bizonal economic structure. 


5. Should the Peoples’ Congress, in fact, set up a “government” of the Soviet zone, 
and lay claim to “represent” all of Germany, the Soviet Military Administration might 
accord it local recognition as the established German administration and give propa- 
ganda-credence to its pretensions to govern all of the Zones. The USSR and its satel- 
lites might then be expected to enter into provisional political and economic agreements 
directly with this “government”, laying the foundation for eventual formal recognition 
at such time as the USSR considers it feasible to press the puppet government's claim 


to German sovereignty. 


A 


6. A Soviet-sponsored provisional government which would, in all probability, control 
the Soviet sector of Berlin, might attempt by constant propaganda and possibly by direct 
interference in the public utilities affecting the Western sectors to obtain the with- 
drawal from Berlin of Western representation in the event that any still remained. 
The USSR could support this program with further concrete action similar to the 
transport block and declare the dissolution of the ACC, seeking to place the onus 
for its failure on the West. 


7. If, at any time, the Soviet Union decided that the new government of Eastern 
Germany is sufficiently loyal or adequately controlled by the USSR to be a trusted 
satellite, that further Soviet interference in Western Germany through quadripartite 
means is hopeless, and that the Western Powers are susceptible of blame for the 
‘partition of Germany, the USSR might officially recognize the Eastern German gov- 
ernment, and by agreement continue the “protection” of the Red Army while develop- 
ing a German Army and perfecting the police system. Both the USSR and the East- 
ern German “state” would then launch a campaign for German unity and independence 
designed to win sufficient German converts in the Western Zones to reduce materially 
German cooperation in the West and to attempt to undermine the program of the 
Western Powers. 


8. Although each of these successive steps involves the risk of war in the event of 
miscalculation of Western resistance or of unforeseen circumstances, each move on 
the program could be implemented without the application of military force if 
adroitly made as merely a retaliatory measure necessitated by unilateral Western 
Power action, and if pressed only at opportune moments. 


nea : 
DISTRIBUTION ke Se 
The President o 
Secretary of State ~~ 


Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief 

Secretary of Defense 

Secretary of the Army 

Secretary of the Navy 

Secretary of the Air Force 

Executive Secretary, National Security Council 

Chairman, National Security Resources Board 

Chief of Staff, US Army , 

Chief of Naval Operations 

Chief of Staff, US Air Force 

Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army 
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations) 

Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force 

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence 

Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army 

Chief of Naval Intelligence 

Director of Intelligence, US Alr Force 

Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff 

Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group 

Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee 

Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission 
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission 

Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State 


U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
2426—-S—1948 


