CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


POSSIBILITY OF DIRECT SOVIET 
MILITARY ACTION DURING 1948 


CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM 
RELEASE IN FULL 


ORE 22-48 


Published on 
2 APRIL 1948 


COPY NO.71 
FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
FOR COLLECTION AND DISSEMINATION 


BLCOokS8 


DISSEMINATION NOTICE 


1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient 
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's 
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further 
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-~- 
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following: 


i=} 


. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for 
the Department of State 


b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army 

c. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy 

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force 

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission 

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff 


g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other 
Department or Agency 


2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with 
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by 
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. 


WARNING 


This document contains imMgfmation affecting the national 
defense of the United | ats within the meaning of the 
Espionage Act, 50 U,S€. as amended. Its trans- 
mission or the reyélation of its contents in any manner to 
an unauthorizéd person is prohibited\gy law. 


ORE 22-48 TOP fos 


POSSIBILITY OF DIRECT SOVIET MILITARY ACTION DURING 1948 
Report by a Joint Ad Hoc Committee * 


THE PROBLEM 


1. We have been directed to estimate the likelihood of a Soviet resort to direct mili- 
tary action during 1948. 


DISCUSSION 


2. Our conclusions are based on considerations discussed in the Enclosure. 


CONCLUSIONS 


3. The preponderance of available evidence and of considerations derived from the 
“logic of the situation” supports the conclusion that the USSR will not resort to direct 
military action during 1948. 


4. However, in view of the combat readiness and disposition of the Soviet armed 
forces and the strategic advantage which the USSR might impute to the occupation of 
Western Europe and the Near East, the possibility must be recognized that the USSR 
might resort to direct military action in 1948, particularly if the Kremlin should inter- 
pret some US move, or series of moves, as indicating an intention to attack the USSR 
or its satellites. 


* This estimate was prepared by a joint ad hoc committee representing CIA and the intelligence 
agencies of the Department of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. The date of the 
estimate is 30 March 1948. 


4 . 1 TOP g@CRET 


TOP fs 


ENCLOSURE 


DISCUSSION 


1. The Soviet military forces are estimated to have the current capability of over- 
running all of Western Europe and the Near East to Cairo within a short period of time. 

2. Soviet military forces along the frontiers of Western Europe and the Near East 
are estimated to be combat ready and generally so disposed that they could launch an 
immediate offensive. 

3. Since the end of the war Soviet Ground Forces have been reorganized to provide 
a substantial increase in mobility, more effective firepower, and improved leadership on 
all levels. The mobilization system permits tripling of strength within 30 days. The 
air forces have been provided with a substantial number of jet aircraft and several 
regiments of long-range bombers and are now organized into fifteen air armies, as 
compared with seventeen at the end of the war. An extensive air defense system has 
been developed along the Eastern and Western frontiers, employing an increasing 
number of jet interceptors and an effective radar system deployed in depth. There is 
evidence of increased emphasis on the development and production of long-range 
high-speed submarines. Soviet industrial production has continued to emphasize mili- 
tary rather than civilian requirements. 

4. By exploiting the postwar political and economic instability in Europe and the 
rest of the world along traditional Marxist lines, Soviet leaders have already obtained 
very substantial results. The exploitation of such unstable conditions is the cheapest 
and safest method by which Soviet leaders can obtain their objectives. 

5. Certain basic factual data can be produced to help determine whether or not 
Soviet leaders would stand to gain or lose by exercising their current military capa- 
bility of overrunning Western Europe and part of the Near East. Many factors bearing 
upon this problem, however, would still have to be determined on the basis of estimate 
and logic rather than upon factual evidence. (This problem is under detailed study.) 

6. The determination at this time of whether or not Soviet leaders intend to employ 
their military capability rests, in the last analysis, essentially upon logic rather than 
upon evidence. We have no access to the thinking or decisions of the Kremlin and 
little contact with lower echelons of Soviet officialdom. Such evidence as is currently 
coming to hand, however, suggests that Soviet leaders do not presently intend to exer- 
cise their military capability of overrunning Western Europe and part of the Near East. 
Since the Czechoslovakian coup there have been some reports Suggesting that Soviet 
leaders may intend shortly to resort to military action but these have been from uneval- 
uated sources and can logically be interpreted as attempts by Soviet or anti-Soviet 
elements to exploit for their own purposes the fear psychosis prevalent throughout 
Europe as a result of the timing and rapidity of the Czech coup. 

7. The intelligence agencies have generally taken the position that the USSR, in 
spite of its current military capabilities, would not commit itself to a course of action 


- 2 : TOP fox 


rope 


leading to war until, in the opinion of Soviet leaders, its economic potential had become 
adequate for a global war and until it possessed a reasonable stock of atomic bombs. 
It has also been assumed in some quarters that if, prior to the realization of the above 
objectives, the USSR were faced with impending stability in Europe, it would tempo- 
rarily abandon its expansionist policy, consolidate its gains, and await the opportunity 
to promote and exploit new conditions of instability as they might develop in the 
future. 

8. The positions taken in 7 above require a careful reappraisal, particularly in the 
light of recent US policy statements and other measures against Communist expansion. 


CONSIDERATIONS WHICH MIGHT INDUCE THE SOVIET LEADERS TO RESORT 
TO MILITARY ACTION, IN THE ORDER OF THEIR IMPORTANCE: 


9. Soviet leaders may become convinced that the US actually has intentions of 
military aggression within the near future. In view of the well known suspicions 
inherent in the minds of Soviet leaders, and the isolation of most of these leaders from 
the west, it is possible that the Politburo might come to this conclusion. 


10. Even if Soviet leaders did not expect imminent US aggression, they might 
estimate that an ultimate military clash with the US was inevitable and that, in view 
of current Soviet capabilities for overrunning Western Europe and the Near East, it 
would be to the USSR’s advantage to strike at these areas in 1948. Soviet leaders may 
estimate that their military superiority relative to the Western Powers is now at its 
maximum. The USSR is faced with the prospect of (1) US rearmament and presumably 
the rearmament by the US of the Western European Powers now joined in a military 
alliance and (2) increasing US production of atomic bombs and longer range aircraft 
which will increase US capabilities for covering strategic Soviet targets. 

11. Soviet leaders might estimate that if they overran Europe and part of the Near 
East they would vastly improve their military security and might obtain either a mili- 
tary stalemate or a negotiated peace based on the following considerations: 

a. That Soviet acquisition of Western Europe and the Near East might make it 
too difficult, or at least too costly, for the US to attempt an invasion of these areas by 
ground forces. The situation would differ greatly from that obtaining in World Wars 
ITand II. In those wars the US had beachheads on the continent or in England and 
the Soviet Union was an ally or a neutral in the rear of Germany. In this case the US 
would be faced with the manpower and space of most of the Eurasian land mass. 

b. That domination of the channel coast would enable them to neutralize 
the UK. 

c. That under these circumstances: 

(1) the US public might not support the continuation of the war even if 
the military so desired, and 

(2) the US in any event would be restricted to an air war and naval 
blockade, which, although capable of inflicting substantial damage on the Soviet and 
European economies, would not be able to dislodge the USSR from its newly won 
position. 


: 3 TORMECRET 


TOP RET 


d. That the denial to the Western Powers of Near Eastern oil would seriously 
impair their war potential. 

12. The Soviet leaders might believe that, in spite of the currently impoverished 
condition of Western European economy and the vast difficulties inherent in the 
organization, control, and assimilation of this area, the quickest and easiest way to 
remedy the economic deficiencies of the USSR would be to seize the industrial capacity, 
the technical skills, and the scientific resources of Western Europe. 

13. Soviet leaders might estimate that the European recovery program will succeed 
in stabilizing Europe for a protracted period and thereby deny them the possibility of 
gaining control of Western Europe through revolutionary and subversive methods. 


CONSIDERATIONS WHICH MIGHT RESTRAIN SOVIET LEADERS FROM 
RESORTING TO DIRECT MILITARY ACTION DURING 1948, IN THE 
ORDER OF THEIR IMPORTANCE: 


14. The ultimate effectiveness of the European Tecovery program in stabilizing the 
economic situation in Western Europe is still far from assured, particularly in the light 
of Communist capabilities for disruption in Italy and France. The opportunities for 
further Soviet gains through the exploitation of economic, political, and social instabil- 
ity, while recently diminished, are by no means exhausted. 


15. Soviet leaders have been in the past habitually cautious and deliberate, and, 
consequently, might be reluctant voluntarily to incur the risks inherent in a major war. 

16. The occupation of Europe and the Near East would impose serious problems on 
Soviet leaders and expose them to grave risks. 

a. The maintenance of military and police forces adequate to protect the 
defensive position gained by the occupation of most of Western Europe and the Near 
East would place a serious strain on both the economic resources and manpower reserve 
of the Soviet Union. Assuming that war with the US continues following the conquest 
of Western Europe and the Near East, the hostile populations of these areas and the 
satellites would form an enormous subversive element that would become particularly 
dangerous with the approach of US forces. 

b. In addition to the problem of physical Security, the control and assimilation 
of the economies of Western Europe and the exploitation of the resources of the Near 
East would impose a tremendous strain upon Soviet administrative organs and person- 
nel resources, even with the help of well organized local Communist parties in some 
areas. 

c. Soviet personnel would be exposed to the standard of living and political 
ideas of Western Europe. Following World War II, the Soviet leaders have had a serious 
problem of reindoctrinating not only the returned soldiers but the entire Soviet popu- 
lation. The exigencies of war, entirely apart from the possibility of any alien contami- 
nation, appear to undermine Soviet ideology and discipline. 


17. The basic economic deficiencies of the USSR in terms of requirements for 
. global war against the US: 


TOP RET 


a. The USSR suffered enormous physical damage in World War II and has 
probably not regained production levels of 1940 in all basic industries. 

b. Capacity is inadequate in a number of vital fields, including transportation, 
communications, and in the production of steel, oil, and machine tools. 

c. In order to exploit the European economic potential, the USSR would have 
to supply raw materials and food to an already impoverished European continent cut 
off from the resources of the Western Hemisphere and other parts of the world outside 
the Soviet Union and her sphere of influence. 


18. Soviet leaders may anticipate that, in spite of the European recovery program, 
the Marxist prediction that the capitalist world will collapse of its own accord will be 
fulfilled, following the economic dislocation of Word War II. 


19. The US has a growing stock of atomic bombs, Soviet leaders may not regard 
this weapon as a decisive factor, and may have considerable confidence in the USSR's 
defensive capabilities against atomic attack; they probably recognize, however, that 
atomic warfare can inflict vast destruction and loss of life on the USSR. 


20. The Soviet population is definitely war-weary and has long been promised an 

improvement in its standard of living. While the Russians traditionally unite to repel 

_ foreign invaders, Soviet leaders might question whether, under present circumstances, 
they could risk the possibility of a protracted global war. 


21. The politicians in the Politburo have always been suspicious of the military. 
War would again bring the military to the fore and might constitute a real or imagined 
threat to the Party leaders. 


4 5 TOR gCRET 


DISTRIBUTION 


The President 

Secretary of State 

Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief 

Secretary of Defense 

Secretary of the Army 

Secretary of the Navy 

Secretary of the Air Force 

Executive Secretary, National Security Council 

Chairman, National Security Resources Board 

Chief of Staff, US Army 

Chief of Naval Operations 

Chief of Staff, US Air Force 

Director of Plans and Operations, General Staff, US Army 
Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations) 

Director of Plans and Operations, US Air Force 

Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, Research and Intelligence 
Director of Intelligence, General Staff, US Army 

Chief of Naval Intelligence 

Director of Intelligence, US Air Force 

Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff 

Secretary, Joint Intelligence Group 

Secretary, State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee 
Executive Secretary, Military Liaison Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission 
Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission 
Chief, Acquisition and Distribution, OICD, Department of State 


fpr 2 1243 PH "dB 


—FOP-SECRET 


U. 8. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
2351—S—1948 


mare 


POSSIBILITY OF DIRECT SOVIET 
MILITARY ACTION DURING 1948-49 


ORE 22-48 (Addendum) 
Published 16 September 1948 


DISSEMINATION NOTICE 


1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient 
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s 
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further 
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa- 
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following: 


a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for 
the Department of State 


. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army 
. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy 
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force 


. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission 
f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff 


g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other 
Department or Agency 


ox QO oO 


2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with 
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by 
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. 


DISTRIBUTION: 


Office of the President 

National Security Council 

National Security Resources Board 
Department of State 

Office of Secretary of Defense 
Department of the Army 
Department of the Navy 
Department of the Air Force 
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee 
Joint Chiefs of Staff 

Atomic Energy Commission 
Research and Development Board 


ORE 22-48 (Addendum) 


POSSIBILITY OF DIRECT SOVIET MILITARY ACTION DURING 1948-49 
Report of Ad Hoc Committee’ Reviewing the Conclusions on ORE 22-48 


THE PROBLEM 


1. We have been directed to estimate if the events of the past six months have 
increased or decreased the likelihood of a Soviet resort to military action during 1948-49. 


BASIS FOR ESTIMATE’ 


2. Available intelligence bearing on the stated problem is too meager to support a 
conclusion that the USSR either will or will not resort to deliberate military action 
during 1948-49. 


DISCUSSION 


3. Our conclusions are based on considerations discussed in the Enclosure. 


CONCLUSIONS 


4. We do not believe that the events of the past six months have made deliberate 
Soviet military action a probability during 1948-49. They have, however, added some 
weight to the factors that might induce the USSR to resort to such action. It is con- 
sidered, therefore, that the possibility of a resort to deliberate military action has been 
slightly increased. 


5. However, the developments of the past six months which constitute setbacks to 
the Soviet international position have had the effect of adding to the pressure on the 
USSR. This pressure increases the possibility of the USSR resorting to diplomatic 
ventures which, while not constituting acts of war or even envisaging the likelihood of 
war, will involve an increased risk of miscalculations that could lead to war. 


» This estimate was prepared by a joint ad hoc committee representing CIA and the intelligence 
agencies of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. The date of the 
estimate is 27 August 1948. 

?The Office of Naval Intelligence concurs generally in the discussion, as contained in the 
Enclosure. 

However, ONI feels that the “Basis for Estimate” as stated is not valid. Evidence of Soviet 
intentions is meager, but such intelligence as is available does not indicate a resort to deliberate 
military action. If the position is taken that the intelligence available cannot support conclusions 
one way or the other, any conclusions drawn from such a basis of estimate are of doubtful value 
for U. S. planning. 

Therefore, ONI feels that the conclusions stated in ORE 22-48, as modified by ONI comment, 
are still valid. ONI concurs, however, that the events of the past six months have increased slightly 
the possibility of military action through miscalculation as stated in paragraph 5 of subject report, 
and would include under miscalculation the possibility that minor military incidents might expand 
into uncontrolled conflict. 


PorreteR ey 


ENCLOSURE 


DISCUSSION 


1. Reference is made to ORE 22-48. In general, and except for such modifications 
as follow, it is considered that the discussion and conclusions thereof are still valid and 


are, particularly in respect to the economic and political factors involved, still generally 
applicable to the immediate future. 


EVENTS WITHIN THE SOVIET ORBIT WHICH MIGHT INDUCE A USSR 
RESORT TO EARLY MILITARY ACTION 


2. In the USSR itself, we find no reliable evidence of military, economic, or political 


developments of sufficient importance to warrant any revision of our previous con- 
clusions. 


3. In the Eastern European Satellites, signs of naifonalist sentiment, of mass 
peasant antagonism to Communist agrarian policies, and of dissension in Communist 
ranks, have suggested the growth of wavering loyalties and resistance to central direc- 
tion from USSR. The defection of Tito and the Yugoslav Communist Party is our most 
striking evidence for the existence of an unstable situation. There is no doubt that this 
situation has caused concern in the Kremlin. While the USSR might consider the use 
of force to correct this situation, and general war might result, we think such a decision 
unlikely unless the Soviet leaders believe that the issue has reached a point where it 
seriously threatens their control of the Soviet orbit. At such a time the risk of war 
might seem preferable to the risk of losing control. There is no reliable evidence, how- 
ever, that this point has been reached. 


EVENTS IN WESTERN EUROPE WHICH MIGHT INDUCE A USSR RESORT 
TO EARLY MILITARY ACTION 

4. The following events in Western Europe may have brought about some change 
in Soviet strategic thinking: 

a. The positive effort of the US to recreate economic and political stability 
through the European Recovery Program (ERP). 

b. The increasing firmness of the Western Powers toward Soviet-Communist 
expansion, with the growth of military solidarity among Western European nations. 

c. The initial steps to establish a Western German Government. 

d. The failure of Communist tactics in Western Europe. 

5. In ORE 22-48, we stated that “the opportunities for further Soviet gains through 
the exploitation of economic, political and social instability, while recently diminished, 
are by no means exhausted.” These opportunities probably appear to Soviet analysts 
to be still further limited in Western Europe. While it can be argued that an increasing 
reduction of opportunity may be an inducement to early Soviet military action, it is 


z 2 TOP SECBED— 


qr oP-SECREE— 
possible that the events noted above have added to the strain on the Communist political 
control of Eastern Europe and therefore contributed to the weaknesses discussed in 
paras. 2-3 above. It is considered that the USSR, although confronted with resistance 
to Communist expansion in Europe, is still capable of exploiting existing political and 
economic instability, and is therefore more likely to continue to employ these means 
than to accept the risk of direct military action in the immediate future. Although 


Europe will remain the major objective, strategic areas elsewhere are also available 
for profitable exploitation. 


EVENTS IN THE UNITED STATES WHICH MIGHT INDUCE A USSR 
RESORT TO EARLY MILITARY ACTION 


6. Since Soviet leaders view, and Communist Parties are indoctrinated to regard 
the US as the chief bulwark of capitalism, and hence the major antagonist of the USSR, 
the strategy and tactics of the Kremlin are probably strongly influenced by an analysis 
of US capabilities and intentions. 


7. Until recently, it has been supposed that Soviet planners were assuming a severe 
economic crisis in the US by the end of 1948, and that from this would follow a progres- 
sive weakening of US power potential. In turn, the political and economic recovery of 
Western Europe would be inhibited. It now appears possible that this assumption is 
being revised, and that Soviet planners now assume that US economy will continue 
productive and prosperous so long as it enjoys the export markets provided by the 
European Recovery Program. 


8. It appears probable that Soviet leaders will be forced to admit a miscalculation 
of factors in US domestic politics which they earlier considered favorable. Neither the 
isolationists, the pacifists, nor the Wallace “Progressives” have seriously undermined 
popular support of a firm US diplomatic line or of adequate US defense proposals. 
Opinion with respect to US foreign policy has not been fundamentally split along 
partisan lines. Never before, in peacetime, has US opinion been so uniform on a ques- 
tion of foreign policy. \ 

9. In ORE 22-48, we stated that “Soviet leaders may have become convinced that 
the US actually has intentions of military aggression in the near future.” Recent 
events may have somewhat strengthened Soviet conviction in this respect. The pass- 
age of a peacetime Draft Act, the continued development of atomic weapons, the 
general acceptance of increased military appropriations, the establishment of US bases 
within range of targets in the USSR, the activities of US naval forces in the Mediter- 
ranean, and the movement to Europe of US strategic airforce units are instances in 
point. We think it unlikely, however, that these events have actually led Soviet leaders 
to the conclusion that positive US aggression must be soon expected. It is considered 
that they are more probably taken to mean that the ultimate conflict with the capitalist 
system will be resolved by force rather than by the methods of ‘cold war.” While 
the danger of an early Soviet military move, made in calculated anticipation of this 
ultimate conflict may be slightly increased by these circumstances, we do not estimate 
that such a move has become a probability. 


SPOS SECRET 


Gey 


WQORWSECRET 


10. Soviet analysts, examining these evidences of US intentions, might conclude 
that they can no longer assume the early disintegration of the capitalist world, and 
that US military potential, now low, will steadily improve and will ultimately be accom- 
panied by an improvement in the military potential of Western Europe. This might, 
in turn, suggest looking to military action for the achievement of their aims. How- 
ever, since the usefulness of non-military methods has not yet been exhausted in Europe, 
and since there are other regions open to significant exploitation, we do not estimate 
that a USSR resort to deliberate military action has become a probability. 


11. Several recent events—especially the Soviet blockade of Berlin—have served to 
increase the tension between the USSR and the US. With this heightened tension has 
come a corresponding increase in the possibility of a miscalculation which might result 
in general conflict. 


BRN HE 9) wae 


U. 8S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
2989-—S—1948 


