(xxxviii) 
17th April 1944. Directive by the Supreme Commander to 


U.S.S.T.A.F. and Bomber Command for support of 
‘Overlord’ during the preparatory period 


OVERALL MISSION 


1. The overall mission of the strategical Air Forces remains the pro- 
gressive destruction and dislocation of the German military, industrial 
and economic system, and the destruction of vital elements of lines of 
communication. In the execution of this overall mission the immediate 
objective is first the destruction of German air combat strength, by the 
successful prosecution of the Combined Bomber offensive. Our re-entry 
on the Continent constitutes the supreme operation for 1944; all possible 
support must, therefore, be afforded to the Allied Armies by our Air 
Forces to assist them in establishing themselves in the lodgment area. 


PARTICULAR MISSION 
2. The first pre-requisite of success in the maintenance of the combined 


1 Not printed. 


168 APPENDIX 8 


Bomber offensive and of our re-entry on the Continent is an overall reduc- 
tion of the enemy’s air combat strength and particularly his air fighter 
strength. The primary role of our Air Forces in the European and 
Mediterranean theatres is, therefore, to secure and maintain air 
superiority. 

3. Our armies will also require the maximum possible assistance on the 
ground preparatory to the actual assault. This can best be given by inter- 
fering with rail communications, particularly as affecting the enemy 
movements and concentrations in the ‘OVERLORD’ area. A further 
Directive covering the employment of the strategical air forces during 
the assault period and the succeeding land operations will be issued in 
due course. 

4. The particular mission of the strategical air forces prior to the 
‘OVERLORD’ assault is: 


(a) To deplete the German air force and particularly the German 
fighter forces, and to destroy and disorganise the facilities sup- 
porting them. 

(b) To destroy and disrupt the enemy’s rail communications, particu- 
larly those affecting the enemy’s movement towards the ‘OvER- 
LORD’ lodgment area. 


U.S.S.T.A.F. 


5. Under this particular mission objectives allotted to the U.S.S.T.A.F. 
are as follows, in present order of priority: 


(i) Primary objective: The German Air Force with primary importance 
upon German fighter forces by all means available, including 
attrition in the air and on the ground, and attacks against the 
following precision targets and industrial areas and facilities sup- 
porting them: 


Equal first priority: 

(a) German single engine fighter airframe and airframe com- 
ponent production. 
German twin engine fighter airframe and airframe com- 
ponent production. 
Axis-controlled ball bearing production. 

Second priority: 

(b) Installations supporting German fighter air forces. 

Third priority: 

(c) German bomber air forces and installations supporting them. 


(ii) Secondary objective: The enemy rail transportation system. 


6. The list of targets best calculated to achieve the primary objective 
will be passed to the Supreme Commander by the Air Ministry. The list 
of targets chosen to achieve the secondary objective and the relative 
priorities accorded them at present will be issued separately. These priori- 
ties will be adjusted from time to time in accordance with the situation. 

7. Whenever weather or tactical conditions are unsuitable for visual 


DIRECTIVES 169 


attack of the primary objectives, attacks will be delivered by blind bomb- 
ing technique on BERLIN or other important industrial areas. Targets 
will be selected so as to further the aims of attrition of the German fighter 
force, and the dislocation of the enemy’s transportation system. 


R.A.F. BOMBER COMMAND 


8. In view of the tactical difficulties of destroying precise targets by 
night, R.A.F. Bomber Command will continue to be employed in ac- 
cordance with their main aim of disorganising German industry. Their 
operations will, however, be designed as far as practicable to be comple- 
mentary to the operations of the U.S.S.T.A.F. In particular, where tac- 
tical conditions allow, their targets will be selected so as to give the maxi- 
mum assistance in the aims of reducing the strength of the German Air 
Force, and destroying and disrupting enemy rail communications. A list 
of targets chosen to achieve these objectives, and showing the relative 
priorities accorded them at present, will be issued separately. These 
priorities will be adjusted from time to time in accordance with the 
situation. 


TARGETS IN S.E. EUROPE 


g. The order of priority of objectives for the employment of the strate- 
gic air forces operating in the MEDITERRANEAN and South East EUROPE 
is as follows: 


(i) Emergency requirements of the Battle of rraLy. 
(ii) The objectives set out in para. 5 above. 
(ui) Targets in the BALKANS of great political and military impor- 
tance. 


10. In order to take advantage of favourable opportunities to attack 
targets of great political and military importance in s.£. EUROPE, the 
order of bombing priority given in para. 9 above may be altered when 
the situation warrants, and when results of the highest importance may be 
expected therefrom. The Commanding General, U.S.S.T.A.F. will be 
kept informed of changes in the political and military importance of these 
objectives as affecting the priority of bombing tasks generally, and will be 
given timely warning of attacks against such targets in order to enable 
proper coordination between 15th Air Force and 8th Air Force operations. 


OTHER OBJECTIVES 


11, Other objectives of great or fleeting importance may present them- 
selves and orders will be issued accordingly. Where possible, the necessary 
plans and preparations for these have been made. An example of this 
is the attack of important units of the German Fleet in harbour or 
at sea. 


‘CROSSBOW’ 


12. The responsibility for neutralising threats from ‘cROssBow’ is laid 
on the Air Commander-in-Chief, A.E.A.F. Where necessary, he may call 
for assistance from the strategical air forces in the UNITED KINGDOM 


170 APPENDIX 8 


through the Deputy Supreme Allied Commander, who will issue the 
necessary instructions. 


S.O.E. OPERATIONS 


13. All S.O.E. Operations undertaken by units of Bomber Command 
and U.S.S.T.A.F. will be in accordance with the requirements of the 
Supreme Allied Commander, and orders will be issued accordingly from 
time to time. 


POLITICAL ASPECTS OF TRANSPORTATION PLAN 


14. The political aspects of this plan, as affecting the French, will be 
kept under continuous supervision, with especial reference to the casual- 
ties to the civilian populations involved. 


REVISION OF DIRECTIVE 


15. This Directive will be subject to review after ‘OVERLORD’ is 
established on the Continent. 
By Command of General Eisenhower. 
(Sgd.) W. B. Smitn 
Lieutenant General, GSC, 
Chief of Staff? 


